README.md, before:


# osrm <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="140"/>

[![CRAN](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/osrm)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=osrm)
[![downloads](https://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/osrm?color=brightgreen)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=osrm)
[![R build
status](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/actions/workflows/check-standard.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/riatelab/osrm/branch/master/graph/badge.svg?token=JOJNuBCH9M)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/riatelab/osrm)
[![Project Status: Active – The project has reached a stable, usable
state and is being actively
developed.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)

***Interface Between R and the OpenStreetMap-Based Routing Service
[OSRM](http://project-osrm.org/)***

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/cover.png)

## Description

OSRM is a routing service based on OpenStreetMap data. See
<http://project-osrm.org/> for more information. This package enables
the computation of routes, trips, isochrones and travel distances
matrices (travel time and kilometric distance).

This package relies on the usage of a running OSRM service (tested with
v5.26.0 of OSRM).

You can run your own instance of OSRM following guidelines provided
[here](https://github.com/Project-OSRM/osrm-backend). The simplest
solution is probably the one based on [docker
containers](https://github.com/Project-OSRM/osrm-backend#using-docker).

:warning: **You must be careful using the OSRM demo server and read the
[*about* page](https://routing.openstreetmap.de/about.html) of the
service**:  
\> [One request per second max. No scraping, no heavy
usage.](https://routing.openstreetmap.de/about.html)

## Features

-   `osrmTable` Get travel time matrices between points.

-   `osrmRoute` Get the shortest path between two points.

-   `osrmTrip` Get the travel geometry between multiple unordered
    points.

-   `osrmIsochrone` Get polygons of isochrones.

## Demo

### `osrmTable()`

``` r
library(osrm)
```

``` r
library(sf)
apotheke.sf <- st_read(system.file("gpkg/apotheke.gpkg", package = "osrm"), 
                       quiet = TRUE)
# Travel time matrix
distA <- osrmTable(loc = apotheke.sf[1:5,])
distA$durations
```

<small>

|     |    1 |    2 |    3 |    4 |    5 |
|:----|-----:|-----:|-----:|-----:|-----:|
| 1   |  0.0 | 21.1 | 33.4 | 21.2 | 12.6 |
| 2   | 22.1 |  0.0 | 42.3 | 16.1 | 20.2 |
| 3   | 33.0 | 43.0 |  0.0 | 30.5 | 27.4 |
| 4   | 20.1 | 15.3 | 29.7 |  0.0 | 12.7 |
| 5   | 10.2 | 20.3 | 26.8 | 12.3 |  0.0 |

</small>

### `osrmRoute()`

``` r
library(maptiles)
library(mapsf)
# Transform to webmercator for a better display of map tiles
apotheke.sf <- st_transform(apotheke.sf, 3857)
# Route
route <- osrmRoute(src = apotheke.sf[74,], dst = apotheke.sf[55,],
                   overview = "full")
# Get map tiles
osm <- get_tiles(x = route, crop = TRUE, zoom = 13)
# Map
theme <- mf_theme(mar = c(0,0,1.2,0), inner = FALSE, line = 1.2, cex = .9, 
                  pos = "center", tab = FALSE)
mf_export(osm,filename = "img/route.png", width = ncol(osm), theme = theme)
mf_raster(osm, add = TRUE)
mf_map(route, lwd = 4, add = TRUE, col = "blue")
mf_map(route, lwd = 1, col = "white", add = TRUE)
mf_map(apotheke.sf[c(74,55),], pch = 20, col = "red", add = TRUE)
mf_title("osrmRoute()")
mf_credits(get_credit("OpenStreetMap"), pos = "bottomright", cex = .8, 
           bg = "#ffffff80")
dev.off()
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/route.png)

### `osrmTrip()`

``` r
# Trip 
trips <- osrmTrip(loc = apotheke.sf[10:20,])
trip <- trips[[1]]$trip
# Get map tiles
osm2 <- get_tiles(x = trip, crop = TRUE, zoom = 11)
# Map
mf_export(osm2,filename = "img/trip.png", width = ncol(osm2), theme = theme)
mf_raster(osm2, add = TRUE)
mf_map(trip, col = "black", lwd = 4, add = TRUE )
mf_map(trip, col = c("red", "white"), lwd = 1, add = TRUE)
mf_map(apotheke.sf[10:20,], pch = 21, col = "red", cex = 1.5, add = TRUE)
mf_title("osrmTrip()")
mf_credits(get_credit("OpenStreetMap"), pos = "bottomright", cex = .8, 
           bg = "#ffffff80")
dev.off()
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/trip.png)

### `osrmIsochrone()`

``` r
bks <- seq(from = 0, to = 14, by = 2)
iso <- osrmIsochrone(loc = apotheke.sf[87,], breaks = bks, res = 70)
# Get map tiles
osm3 <- get_tiles(x = iso, crop = TRUE, zoom = 12)
# Map
cols <- hcl.colors(n = 7, palette = "Emrld", alpha = 0.75, rev = F)
mf_export(osm3,filename = "img/iso.png", width = ncol(osm3), theme = theme)
mf_raster(osm3, add = TRUE)
mf_map(x = iso, var = "center", type = "choro", 
       breaks = bks, border = NA, pal = cols,
       leg_pos = "topleft", leg_frame = T,
       leg_title = "Isochrones\n(min)",
       leg_title_cex = 1, leg_val_cex = .8,
       add = TRUE)
mf_map(apotheke.sf[87,], pch = 21, col = "red", 
       cex = 1.5, add=TRUE)
mf_title("osrmIsochrone()")
mf_credits(get_credit("OpenStreetMap"), pos = "bottomright", cex = .8, 
           bg = "#ffffff80")
dev.off()
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/iso.png)

## Installation

-   Development version on GitHub

``` r
remotes::install_github("riatelab/osrm")
```

-   Stable version on [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=osrm/)

``` r
install.packages("osrm")
```

## Community Guidelines

One can contribute to the package through [pull
requests](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/pulls) and report issues or
ask questions [here](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/issues).

Commit message:

docs: add instructions on how to contribute
fix #103

README.md, after:


# osrm <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="140"/>

[![CRAN](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/osrm)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=osrm)
[![downloads](https://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/osrm?color=brightgreen)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=osrm)
[![R build
status](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/actions/workflows/check-standard.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/riatelab/osrm/branch/master/graph/badge.svg?token=JOJNuBCH9M)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/riatelab/osrm)
[![Project Status: Active – The project has reached a stable, usable
state and is being actively
developed.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)

***Interface Between R and the OpenStreetMap-Based Routing Service
[OSRM](http://project-osrm.org/)***

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/cover.png)

## Description

OSRM is a routing service based on OpenStreetMap data. See
<http://project-osrm.org/> for more information. This package enables
the computation of routes, trips, isochrones and travel distances
matrices (travel time and kilometric distance).

This package relies on the usage of a running OSRM service (tested with
v5.26.0 of OSRM).

You can run your own instance of OSRM following guidelines provided
[here](https://github.com/Project-OSRM/osrm-backend). The simplest
solution is probably the one based on [docker
containers](https://github.com/Project-OSRM/osrm-backend#using-docker).

:warning: **You must be careful using the OSRM demo server and read the
[*about* page](https://routing.openstreetmap.de/about.html) of the
service**:  
\> [One request per second max. No scraping, no heavy
usage.](https://routing.openstreetmap.de/about.html)

## Features

-   `osrmTable` Get travel time matrices between points.

-   `osrmRoute` Get the shortest path between two points.

-   `osrmTrip` Get the travel geometry between multiple unordered
    points.

-   `osrmIsochrone` Get polygons of isochrones.

## Demo

### `osrmTable()`

``` r
library(osrm)
```

``` r
library(sf)
apotheke.sf <- st_read(system.file("gpkg/apotheke.gpkg", package = "osrm"), 
                       quiet = TRUE)
# Travel time matrix
distA <- osrmTable(loc = apotheke.sf[1:5,])
distA$durations
```

<small>

|     |    1 |    2 |    3 |    4 |    5 |
|:----|-----:|-----:|-----:|-----:|-----:|
| 1   |  0.0 | 21.1 | 33.4 | 21.2 | 12.6 |
| 2   | 22.1 |  0.0 | 42.3 | 16.1 | 20.2 |
| 3   | 33.0 | 43.0 |  0.0 | 30.5 | 27.4 |
| 4   | 20.1 | 15.3 | 29.7 |  0.0 | 12.7 |
| 5   | 10.2 | 20.3 | 26.8 | 12.3 |  0.0 |

</small>

### `osrmRoute()`

``` r
library(maptiles)
library(mapsf)
# Transform to webmercator for a better display of map tiles
apotheke.sf <- st_transform(apotheke.sf, 3857)
# Route
route <- osrmRoute(src = apotheke.sf[74,], dst = apotheke.sf[55,],
                   overview = "full")
# Get map tiles
osm <- get_tiles(x = route, crop = TRUE, zoom = 13)
# Map
theme <- mf_theme(mar = c(0,0,1.2,0), inner = FALSE, line = 1.2, cex = .9, 
                  pos = "center", tab = FALSE)
mf_export(osm,filename = "img/route.png", width = ncol(osm), theme = theme)
mf_raster(osm, add = TRUE)
mf_map(route, lwd = 4, add = TRUE, col = "blue")
mf_map(route, lwd = 1, col = "white", add = TRUE)
mf_map(apotheke.sf[c(74,55),], pch = 20, col = "red", add = TRUE)
mf_title("osrmRoute()")
mf_credits(get_credit("OpenStreetMap"), pos = "bottomright", cex = .8, 
           bg = "#ffffff80")
dev.off()
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/route.png)

### `osrmTrip()`

``` r
# Trip 
trips <- osrmTrip(loc = apotheke.sf[10:20,])
trip <- trips[[1]]$trip
# Get map tiles
osm2 <- get_tiles(x = trip, crop = TRUE, zoom = 11)
# Map
mf_export(osm2,filename = "img/trip.png", width = ncol(osm2), theme = theme)
mf_raster(osm2, add = TRUE)
mf_map(trip, col = "black", lwd = 4, add = TRUE )
mf_map(trip, col = c("red", "white"), lwd = 1, add = TRUE)
mf_map(apotheke.sf[10:20,], pch = 21, col = "red", cex = 1.5, add = TRUE)
mf_title("osrmTrip()")
mf_credits(get_credit("OpenStreetMap"), pos = "bottomright", cex = .8, 
           bg = "#ffffff80")
dev.off()
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/trip.png)

### `osrmIsochrone()`

``` r
bks <- seq(from = 0, to = 14, by = 2)
iso <- osrmIsochrone(loc = apotheke.sf[87,], breaks = bks, res = 70)
# Get map tiles
osm3 <- get_tiles(x = iso, crop = TRUE, zoom = 12)
# Map
cols <- hcl.colors(n = 7, palette = "Emrld", alpha = 0.75, rev = F)
mf_export(osm3,filename = "img/iso.png", width = ncol(osm3), theme = theme)
mf_raster(osm3, add = TRUE)
mf_map(x = iso, var = "center", type = "choro", 
       breaks = bks, border = NA, pal = cols,
       leg_pos = "topleft", leg_frame = T,
       leg_title = "Isochrones\n(min)",
       leg_title_cex = 1, leg_val_cex = .8,
       add = TRUE)
mf_map(apotheke.sf[87,], pch = 21, col = "red", 
       cex = 1.5, add=TRUE)
mf_title("osrmIsochrone()")
mf_credits(get_credit("OpenStreetMap"), pos = "bottomright", cex = .8, 
           bg = "#ffffff80")
dev.off()
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/riatelab/osrm/master/img/iso.png)

## Installation

-   Development version on GitHub

``` r
remotes::install_github("riatelab/osrm")
```

-   Stable version on [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=osrm/)

``` r
install.packages("osrm")
```

## Community Guidelines

One can contribute to the package through [pull
requests](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/pulls) and report issues or
ask questions [here](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/issues). See the
[CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/riatelab/osrm/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)
file for detailed instructions.
